# Number and Strings

## Preface

Numbers are the most basic data type in almost all programming languages. It is the foundation of our connection to the real world through code. There are three numeric types in Python: integer (int), floating point (float), and complex (complex). In most cases, we only need to deal with the first two.

Integers are more worry-free in Python because they do not distinguish between unsigned and never overflow. But the floating point type still has the same accuracy problems as most other programming languages, which often confuses many newcomers who have just entered the programming world: ["Why Are Floating Point Numbers Inaccurate?"](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/21895756/why-are-floating-point-numbers-inaccurate).

Compared to numbers, strings in Python are much more complicated. To master it, you must first figure out the difference between bytes and str. If it is even more unlucky, if you are still a Python2 user, the unicode and character encoding problems are enough for you to drink several pots* (hurry up and move to Python3, just today!)*.

However, none of the above mentioned topics are the subject of this article. If you are interested, you can find piles of related materials online. In this article, we will discuss some of the more subtle and less common programming practices. To help you write better Python code.


## Best Practices

### 1. Write less literal numbers

"Integer literal" refers to the numbers that appear directly in the code. They are distributed in all corners of the code, for example, `0` in the code `del users[0]` is a numeric literal. They are simple and practical, everyone writes every day. **However, when some specific literals repeatedly appear in your code, your "code quality warning light" should light up yellow light . **

For example, if you have just joined a long-cherished new company, there is such a function in the project that your colleagues transferred to you:

```python
def mark_trip_as_featured(trip):
    """Add a trip to the recommended section
    """
    if trip.source == 11:
        do_some_thing(trip)
    elif trip.source == 12:
        do_some_other_thing(trip)
    ...
    return
```

What does this function do? You try to understand what it means, but what about `trip.source == 11`? What about `== 12`? These two lines of code are very simple and do not use any magic features. But for the first time you are exposed to the code, you may need to spend **a whole afternoon** to understand their meaning.

**The problem lies in the literal numbers. ** The person who originally wrote this function may be the veteran programmer who joined at the beginning of the company. And he is very clear about the meaning of those numbers. But if you are a newcomer to this code, it is another matter entirely.

#### Improve code with enum enumeration type

So, how to improve this code? The most direct way is to add comments to these two conditional branches. But here, "add comments" is obviously not the best way to improve the readability of the code* (in fact, it is not the case in most other cases)*. We need to replace these literals with meaningful names, and the enum type (enum) is most appropriate for use here.

`enum` is a built-in module introduced by Python since version 3.4. If you are using an earlier version, you can install it via `pip install enum34`. Here is the sample code using enum:

```python
# -*- coding: utf-8 -*-
from enum import IntEnum

class TripSource(IntEnum):
    FROM_WEBSITE = 11
    FROM_IOS_CLIENT = 12


def mark_trip_as_featured(trip):
    if trip.source == TripSource.FROM_WEBSITE:
        do_some_thing(trip)
    elif trip.source == TripSource.FROM_IOS_CLIENT:
        do_some_other_thing(trip)
    ...
    return
```

Defining repetitive numeric literals as an enumeration type not only improves the readability of the code, but also reduces the chance of bugs in the code.

Imagine if you mistyped `11` into `111` when judging a branch? We often make such mistakes, and such mistakes are particularly difficult to find in the early days. Putting all these numeric literals into the enumeration type can better avoid such problems. Similarly, rewriting string literals into enums can achieve the same benefits.

The benefits of using enumerated types instead of literals:

-**Improve code readability**: No one needs to remember what a magic number represents
-**Improve code accuracy**: Reduce the possibility of bugs when typing wrong numbers or letters

Of course, you don't need to change all the literals in the code to enumerated types. ** Literals appearing in the code can be used as long as they are easy to understand in the context in which they are located. ** For example, those `0` and `-1` that often appear as numeric subscripts are completely okay, because everyone knows what they mean.

### 2. Don't go too far on bare string processing

What is "bare string processing"? In this article, it refers to the use of only basic addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, and loops, and built-in functions/methods to manipulate strings to obtain the results we need. **

Everyone has written such code. Sometimes we need to stitch together a large section of alarm information sent to users, and sometimes we need to construct a large section of SQL query statements sent to the database, like this:

```python
def fetch_users(conn, min_level=None, gender=None, has_membership=False, sort_field="created"):
    """Get User List

    :param int min_level: the required minimum user level, the default is all levels
    :param int gender: filter user gender, the default is all genders
    :param int has_membership: filter all members/non-members, default non-members
    :param str sort_field: sort field, default is by created "user creation date"
    :returns: List: [(User ID, User Name), ...]
    """
    # An ancient SQL stitching technique, using "WHERE 1=1" to simplify string stitching
    # Differentiate query params to avoid SQL injection problems
    statement = "SELECT id, name FROM users WHERE 1=1"
    params = []
    if min_level is not None:
        statement += "AND level >= ?"
        params.append(min_level)
    if gender is not None:
        statement += "AND gender >= ?"
        params.append(gender)
    if has_membership:
        statement += "AND has_membership == true"
    else:
        statement += "AND has_membership == false"

    statement += "ORDER BY ?"
    params.append(sort_field)
    return list(conn.execute(statement, params))
```

The reason why we concatenate the required strings in this way-* here is the SQL statement *-is because it is simple, straightforward and intuitive. But the biggest problem with this is that: **As the function logic becomes more complex, this piece of stitched code becomes error-prone and difficult to expand. **In fact, the above Demo code just only **looks like** there are no obvious bugs* (who knows if there are any other hidden problems)*.

In fact, for structured, regular strings like SQL statements, it is better to construct and edit it in an object-oriented way. The following code uses the [SQLAlchemy](https://www.sqlalchemy.org/) module to accomplish the same function:

```python
def fetch_users_v2(conn, min_level=None, gender=None, has_membership=False, sort_field="created"):
    """Get User List
    """
    query = select([users.c.id, users.c.name])
    if min_level is not None:
        query = query.where(users.c.level >= min_level)
    if gender is not None:
        query = query.where(users.c.gender == gender)
    query = query.where(users.c.has_membership == has_membership).order_by(users.c[sort_field])
    return list(conn.execute(query))
```

The above `fetch_users_v2` function is shorter and easier to maintain, and you don’t need to worry about SQL injection at all. So, when complex bare string processing logic appears in your code, please try to replace it in the following way:

`Q: The target/source string is structured, does it follow a certain format? `

-Yes: Find out if there are open source object-oriented modules to operate them, or write one yourself
    -SQL: SQLAlchemy
    -XML: lxml
    -JSON, YAML...
-No: try to use template engine instead of complex string processing logic to achieve the purpose
    -Jinja2
    -Mako
    -Mustache

### 3. It is not necessary to pre-calculate the literal expression

Occasionally some more complex numbers appear in our code, like this:

```python
def f1(delta_seconds):
    # If the time has passed more than 11 days, do nothing
    if delta_seconds> 950400:
        return
```

Speaking of the beginning, the above code does not have any problems.

First of all, we calculated on a small book (of course, smart people like me would use IPython): how many seconds does `11 days contain? `. Then fill the result with the magic number `950400` in our code, and finally fill in a line with a note: Tell everyone how this magic number came from.

What I want to ask is: **"Why don’t we just write the code as `if delta_seconds <11 * 24 * 3600:`?"**

**"Performance", the answer must be "Performance"**. We all know that Python is a interpreted language, so we pre-calculated `950400` precisely because we don’t want every call to the function `f1` to carry this part of the calculation Overhead. But the fact is: *Even if we change the code to `if delta_seconds <11 * 24 * 3600:`, the function will not have any extra overhead.*

When the Python code is executed, it will be compiled into bytecode by the interpreter, and the truth is hidden in the bytecode. Let's take a look at the dis module:

```python
def f1(delta_seconds):
    if delta_seconds <11 * 24 * 3600:
        return

import dis
dis.dis(f1)

# dis execution result
  5 0 LOAD_FAST 0 (delta_seconds)
              2 LOAD_CONST 1 (950400)
              4 COMPARE_OP 0 (<)
              6 POP_JUMP_IF_FALSE 12

  6 8 LOAD_CONST 0 (None)
             10 RETURN_VALUE
        >> 12 LOAD_CONST 0 (None)
             14 RETURN_VALUE
```

Do you see `2 LOAD_CONST 1 (950400)` above? This means that when the Python interpreter compiles the source code into bytecode, it will calculate the entire expression of `11 * 24 * 3600` and replace it with `950400`.

So, **When complex literals need to appear in our code, please keep the whole formula. It has no impact on performance and will increase the readability of the code.**

> Hint: In addition to pre-calculating numeric literal expressions, the Python interpreter also does similar operations on strings and lists. Everything is for performance. Who makes you spit Python slow?

## Practical tips

### 1. Boolean values ​​are actually "numbers"

In Python, the two Boolean values ​​`True` and `False` can be directly used as two integers `1` and `0`, like this:

```python
>>> True + 1
2
>>> 1 / False
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
ZeroDivisionError: division by zero
```

So what's the point of remembering this? First of all, they can cooperate with the `sum` function to simplify the operation when it is necessary to calculate the total number:

```python
>>> l = [1, 2, 4, 5, 7]
>>> sum(i% 2 == 0 for i in l)
2
```

In addition, if you use a Boolean expression as a subscript of a list, you can achieve a similar ternary expression:

```python
# Similar ternary expression: "Javascript" if 2> 1 else "Python"
>>> ["Python", "Javascript"][2> 1]
'Javascript'
```

### 2. Improve the readability of super long strings

The length of a single line of code should not be too long. For example, in PEP8, it is recommended that the number of characters per line should not exceed **79**. In the real world, most people follow a single line with a maximum number of characters between 79 and 119. If it is just code, such a requirement is relatively easy to meet, but what if an extra long string of code is required in the code?

At this time, in addition to using the slash `\` and the plus sign `+` to split the long string into several sections, there is an easier way: ** Use the brackets to wrap the long string, and then you can freely Wrapped up**:

```python
def main():
    logger.info(("There is something really bad happened during the process. "
                 "Please contact your administrator."))
```

#### When multi-line strings appear in multi-level indentation

There is a more troublesome situation in daily coding. It is necessary to insert a multi-line string literal in the code that has an indentation level. Because multi-line strings cannot contain the current indented spaces, we need to write the code like this:

```python
def main():
    if user.is_active:
        message = """Welcome, today's movie list:
-Jaw (1975)
-The Shining (1980)
-Saw (2004)"""
```

But this way of writing will destroy the visual effect of the indentation of the entire code, which is very abrupt. There are many ways to improve it, for example, we can extract this multi-line string as a variable to the outermost layer of the module. However, if it is more appropriate to use literals in your code logic, you can also use the standard library `textwrap` to solve this problem:

```python
from textwrap import dedent

def main():
    if user.is_active:
        # dedent will indent the leftmost empty string of the entire text
        message = dedent("""\
            Welcome, today's movie list:
            -Jaw (1975)
            -The Shining (1980)
            -Saw (2004)""")
```

#### Large numbers can also become more readable

For those very large numbers, you can improve the readability by adding an underscore in the middle
([PEP515](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0515/), requires Python3.6+).

such as:

```python
>>> 10_000_000.0 # Divide the numbers in "thousands"
10000000.0
>>> 0xCAFE_F00D # Hexadecimal numbers are also valid, a group of 4 is easier to read
3405705229
>>> 0b_0011_1111_0100_1110 # Binary is also valid
16206
>>> int('0b_1111_0000', 2) # When processing strings, underscores are also processed correctly
240
```

### 3. Don't forget the built-in string functions starting with "r"

Python strings have many practical built-in methods, the most commonly used are `.strip()`, `.split()`, etc. Most of these built-in methods are processed from left to right. But it also contains some mirroring methods that start with `r` and are processed from right to left. When dealing with specific logic, using them can make you do more with less.

Suppose we need to parse some access logs, the log format is: "{user_agent}" {content_length}:

    >>> log_line ='"AppleWebKit/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome/70.0.3538.77 Safari/537.36" 47632'


If we use `.split()` to split the log into `(user_agent, content_length)`, we need to write:

```python
>>> l = log_line.split()
>>> "".join(l[:-1]), l[-1]
('"AppleWebKit/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome/70.0.3538.77 Safari/537.36"', '47632')
```

But if you use `.rsplit()`, the processing logic is more straightforward:

```python
>>> log_line.rsplit(None, 1)
['"AppleWebKit/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome/70.0.3538.77 Safari/537.36"', '47632']
```


### 4. Use "infinity" float("inf")

If someone asks you: *"What is the largest/smallest number in Python?"*. What should you answer? Does such a thing exist?

The answer is: "Yes, they are: `float("inf")` and `float("-inf")`". They correspond to positive and negative infinity in the mathematical world. When they are compared with any value, this rule is satisfied: `float("-inf") <any value <float("inf")`.

Because they have such characteristics, we can use them in certain scenarios:

```python
# A. Sort by age in ascending order, without providing age at the end
>>> users = {"tom": 19, "jenny": 13, "jack": None, "andrew": 43}
>>> sorted(users.keys(), key=lambda user: users.get(user) or float('inf'))
['jenny','tom','andrew','jack']

# B. As the initial value of the loop, simplify the first judgment logic
>>> max_num = float('-inf')

>>> # Find the largest number in the list
>>> for i in [23, 71, 3, 21, 8]:
      if i> max_num:
        max_num = i

>>> max_num
71
```

## Common Misunderstandings

### 1. "value += 1" is not thread safe

When we write multi-threaded programs, we often need to deal with complex shared variables and race conditions.

"Thread safety" is usually used to describe a certain behavior or a certain type of data structure that can be shared and used in a multi-threaded environment and produce the expected results. **A typical module that satisfies "thread safety" is [queue module](https://docs.python.org/3/library/queue.html)**.

And the value += 1 operation we often do is easily taken for granted as "thread safe". Because it seems to be an atomic operation* (refers to a smallest operating unit, no other operations will be inserted during execution)*. However, the truth is not the case, although from the point of view of Python code, the operation of `value += 1` seems to be atomic. But when it was finally executed by the Python interpreter, it was no longer "atomic"*.

We can use the aforementioned `dis` module to verify:

```python
def incr(value):
    value += 1


# Use the dis module to view bytecode
import dis

dis.dis(incr)
      0 LOAD_FAST 0 (value)
      2 LOAD_CONST 1 (1)
      4 INPLACE_ADD
      6 STORE_FAST 0 (value)
      8 LOAD_CONST 0 (None)
     10 RETURN_VALUE
```

In the above output, you can see that this simple accumulation statement will be compiled into several different steps including value and save, and in a multi-threaded environment, any other thread may be in one of them Steps cut in, preventing you from getting the right results.

**Therefore, please do not use your intuition to judge whether a behavior is "thread safe", otherwise you will pay a painful price for your intuition when the program has strange bugs in a high concurrency environment.**

### 2. String concatenation is not slow

When I first came into contact with Python, I saw a statement on a website: *"The strings in Python are immutable, so every time the strings are spliced, a new object is generated, resulting in a new memory allocation and efficiency. very low". * I am convinced of this.

So, all along, I try to avoid using `+=` to concatenate strings, and instead use `"".join(str_list)` and other methods to replace it.

However, at a certain chance, I did a simple performance test on Python string concatenation and found: **Python string concatenation is not slow at all! ** After consulting some information, the truth was finally discovered.

Python string concatenation in version 2.2 and earlier is really slow, consistent with the behavior I first saw. But because this operation is too common, performance optimization has been specifically made for it in later versions. Greatly improve the execution efficiency.

Now using `+=` to concatenate strings, the efficiency is very close to `"".join(str_list)`. Therefore, you should splice it at the time of splicing without worrying about any performance problems.

> Hint: If you want to know more detailed related content, you can read this article: [Python-Efficient String Concatenation in Python (2016 edition)-smcl](http://blog.mclemon.io/python-efficient-string-concatenation-in-python-2016-edition)
