# Functions

## Preface


There is no doubt that functions are one of the most important concepts in the Python language. When programming, we decompose the big problems in the real world into small problems, and then hand over the answers one by one. Functions are the nemesis of repeated code and the best weapon against code complexity.

As most stories will have an ending, most functions also end with **return result**. The way the function returns the result determines the experience when calling it. Therefore, understanding how to make a function return results elegantly is a must for writing a good function.

### Python function return method

The Python function returns the result by calling the `return` statement. Use `return value` to return a single value, and use `return value1, value2` to let the function return multiple values ​​at the same time.

If there is no `return` statement in a function body, then the return value of this function defaults to `None`. In addition to returning content through the `return` statement, you can also use the method of throwing an exception* (raise Exception)* to "return the result".

Next, I will list some common programming suggestions related to function return.

## Programming suggestions

### 1. Do not return multiple types for a single function

The Python language is very flexible, and we can use it to easily accomplish things that are difficult to do in other languages. For example: *Let a function return different types of results at the same time. *Achieve a "multifunctional function" that looks very practical.

Just like this:

```python
def get_users(user_id=None):
    if user_id is not None:
        return User.get(user_id)
    else:
        return User.filter(is_active=True)


# Return to a single user
get_users(user_id=1)
# Return multiple users
get_users()
```

When we need to get a single user, we pass the `user_id` parameter, otherwise we don’t pass the parameter to get a list of all active users. Everything is done by a function `get_users`. This design seems reasonable.

However, in the world of functions, it is not a good thing to be proud of writing a Swiss Army knife function with "multi-function". This is because a good function must be ["Single responsibility"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single_responsibility_principle). **Single responsibility means that one function only does one thing with a clear purpose.** Such functions are also less likely to be modified in the future due to changing requirements.

While returning multiple types of functions must violate the "single responsibility" principle, the best functions should always provide stable return values ​​to minimize the caller's processing costs.

Like the above example, we should write two separate functions `get_user_by_id(user_id)` and `get_active_users()` instead.

### 2. Use partial to construct a new function

Assuming such a scenario, there is a function `A` with many parameters in your code, which is very applicable. The other function `B` is to complete the work completely by calling `A`, which is a similar shortcut.

For example, in this example, the `double` function is completely calculated using `multiply`:

```python
def multiply(x, y):
    return x * y


def double(value):
    # Return another function call result
    return multiply(2, value)
```

For the above scenario, we can use the [`partial()`](https://docs.python.org/3.6/library/functools.html#functools.partial) function in the `functools` module to simplify it.

`partial(func, *args, **kwargs)` constructs a new function based on the incoming function and variable (position/keyword) parameters. **All calls to the new function will be delegated to the original function after merging the current call parameters and construction parameters. **

Using the `partial` function, the definition of the `double` function above can be modified to a single-line expression, which is more concise and straightforward.

```python
import functools

double = functools.partial(multiply, 2)
```

> Suggested reading: [partial function official documentation](https://docs.python.org/3.6/library/functools.html#functools.partial)

### 3. Throw exceptions instead of returning results and errors

As I mentioned earlier, functions in Python can return multiple values. Based on this ability, we can write a special class of functions: **functions that return both results and error information.**

```python
def create_item(name):
    if len(name)> MAX_LENGTH_OF_NAME:
        return None,'name of item is too long'
    if len(CURRENT_ITEMS)> MAX_ITEMS_QUOTA:
        return None,'items is full'
    return Item(name=name),''


def create_from_input():
    name = input()
    item, err_msg = create_item(name)
    if err_msg:
        print(f'create item failed: {err_msg}')
    else:
        print(f'item<{name}> created')
```

In the example, the function of `create_item` is to create a new Item object. At the same time, in order to provide the caller with error details when an error occurs, it uses the multiple return value feature to return the error information as the second result.

At first glance, this approach is natural. This is especially true for those who have programming experience in the Go language. But in the Python world, this is not the best way to solve such problems. Because this approach will increase the cost of caller error handling, especially when many functions follow this specification and there are multiple layers of calls.

Python has a perfect *Exception (Exception) mechanism, and to some extent encourages us to use exceptions ([Official documentation about EAFP](https://docs.python.org/3/glossary.html#term-eafp)). Therefore, it is more authentic to use exceptions to handle error processes.*

After introducing a custom exception, the above code can be rewritten as follows:

```python
class CreateItemError(Exception):
    """Exception thrown when creating Item failed"""

def create_item(name):
    """Create a new Item

    :raises: Throw CreateItemError when unable to create
    """
    if len(name)> MAX_LENGTH_OF_NAME:
        raise CreateItemError('name of item is too long')
    if len(CURRENT_ITEMS)> MAX_ITEMS_QUOTA:
        raise CreateItemError('items is full')
    return Item(name=name)


def create_for_input():
    name = input()
    try:
        item = create_item(name)
    except CreateItemError as e:
        print(f'create item failed: {err_msg}')
    else:
        print(f'item<{name}> created')

```

After using "throw exception" instead of "return (result, error message)", the entire error process processing does not seem to change much at first, but in fact it is very different, some details:

- The new version of the function has a more stable return value type, it will always only return the `Item` type or throw an exception
- Although I encourage the use of exceptions here, "exceptions" are always unavoidable and **surprise**, so it is best to state the type of exceptions that may be thrown in the function documentation
- The exception is different from the return value, it will continue to report to the upper layer of the call stack before being caught. Therefore, the first-level caller of `create_item` can omit exception handling and leave it to the upper layer. This feature gives us more flexibility, but it also brings greater risks.


> Hint: How to handle errors in a programming language is a subject that is still controversial. For example, the multi-return method, which is not recommended above, is the core error handling mechanism in Go that lacks exceptions. In addition, even the exception mechanism itself, there are differences between different programming languages.
>
> Abnormal, or not abnormal, is the result of multiple choices made by the language designer, and more often there is no absolute pros and cons. **However, as far as the Python language is concerned, using exceptions to express errors is undoubtedly more in line with the Python philosophy and should be respected. **


### 4. Use None with caution

The `None` value is usually used to indicate **“something that should exist but is missing”**, which is unique in Python. Many programming languages ​​have designs similar to None, such as `null` in JavaScript and `nil` in Go. Because of the unique *null* temperament possessed by None, it is often used as a function return value.

When we use None as the function return value, it is usually the following three cases.

#### 1. As the default return value of the operation function

When an operation function does not require any return value, it usually returns None. At the same time, None is also the default return value of the function without any `return` statement.

For this function, there is no problem using None. The `list.append()` and `os.chdir()` in the standard library belong to this category.

#### 2. As some "expected" values ​​that may not be available

There are some functions whose purpose is usually to try something tentatively. Depending on the situation, there may or may not be results in the end. ** And for the caller, "no result" is completely expected **. For this type of function, it is reasonable to use None as the return value when there is no result.

In the Python standard library, the `re.search` and `re.match` functions under the regular expression module `re` belong to this category. These two functions return `re.Match` objects when a match can be found. If not found, it returns `None`.

#### 3. As the value representing "wrong result" when the call fails

Sometimes, `None` is often used by us as the default return value when a function fails, such as the following function:

```python
def create_user_from_name(username):
    """Create a User instance by user name"""
    if validate_username(username):
        return User.from_username(username)
    else:
        return None


user = create_user_from_name(username)
if user:
    user.do_something()
```

When the username is invalid, the function `create_user_from_name` will return None. But in this scenario, this is actually not good.

However, you may think that this function is completely reasonable, and even you may think that it is very similar to the last usage we mentioned when there was no result. So how to distinguish between these two different situations? The key is: **Is there an "expected" hint between the function signature (name and parameters) and the return value of None?**

Let me explain, whenever you make the function return None, please **read the function name carefully**, and then ask yourself a question: *If I am a user of this function, judging from this name, "I can’t take it To any result" is part of the meaning of the function name?*

Take these two functions as examples:

- `re.search()`: From the function name, `search` means to **search** the matching result from the target string, and the search behavior may or may not have results, so This function is suitable for returning None
- `create_user_from_name()`: From the function name, it means that the user is constructed based on a name, and it cannot read a meaning of `may return or may not return`. So it is not suitable to return None

For those functions that cannot read the hint of None from the function name, there are two ways to modify it. First, if you insist on using the None return value, then please modify the function name. For example, you can rename the function `create_user_from_name()` to `create_user_or_none()`.

The second method is much more common: replace the None return value with a raise exception* (raise Exception)*. Because, if the normal result cannot be returned, it is not part of the meaning of the function, which means that the function has *"unexpected conditions"*, and this is the domain controlled by Exceptions.

Example after using exception rewriting:

```python
class UnableToCreateUser(Exception):
    """Throw """ when the user cannot be created


def create_user_from_name(username):
    ""Create a User instance by username"
    :raises: UnableToCreateUser is thrown when the user cannot be created
    """
    if validate_username(username):
        return User.from_username(username)
    else:
        raise UnableToCreateUser(f'unable to create user from {username}')


    try:
        user = create_user_from_name(username)
    except UnableToCreateUser:
        # Error handling
    else:
        user.do_something()
```

Compared with the return value of None, throwing an exception has the additional advantage of having the features we mentioned in the last scenario: **You can provide the reason for the unexpected result in the exception information**, which It is impossible to return only a None value.

### 5. Reasonable use of "empty object mode"

I mentioned earlier that functions can use `None` values ​​or exceptions to return erroneous results, but both methods have a common drawback. That is, wherever you need to use the function return value, you must add an `if` or `try/except` defense statement to determine whether the result is normal.

Let's see a complete example that works:

```python
import decimal


class CreateAccountError(Exception):
    """Unable to create a account error"""


class Account:
    """A virtual bank account""""

    def __init__(self, username, balance):
        self.username = username
        self.balance = balance

    @classmethod
    def from_string(cls, s):
        """Initialize an account from a string"""
        try:
            username, balance = s.split()
            balance = decimal.Decimal(float(balance))
        except ValueError:
            raise CreateAccountError('input must follow pattern "{ACCOUNT_NAME} {BALANCE}"')

        if balance <0:
            raise CreateAccountError('balance can not be negative')
        return cls(username=username, balance=balance)


def caculate_total_balance(accounts_data):
    """Calculate the total balance of all accounts
    """
    result = 0
    for account_string in accounts_data:
        try:
            user = Account.from_string(account_string)
        except CreateAccountError:
            pass
        else:
            result += user.balance
    return result


accounts_data = [
    'piglei 96.5',
    'cotton 21',
    'invalid_data',
    'roland $invalid_balance',
    'alfred -3',
]

print(caculate_total_balance(accounts_data))
```

In this example, whenever we call `Account.from_string`, we must use `try/except` to catch possible exceptions. If the function needs to be called many times in the project, this part of the work becomes very cumbersome. For this situation, ["Null object pattern (Null object pattern)"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Null_object_pattern) can be used to improve this control flow.

Martin Fowler explained this model in detail in a chapter in his classic book ["Refactoring"](https://martinfowler.com/books/refactoring.html). To put it simply, **is to use a "null type" that conforms to the normal result interface to replace the null return/throw exception, in order to reduce the cost of the caller to process the result.**

After introducing the "Null Object Mode", the above example can be modified to look like this:

```python
class Account:
    # def __init__ has been omitted...

    @classmethod
    def from_string(cls, s):
        """ Initialize an account from a string

        :returns: If the input is valid, return the Account object, otherwise return NullAccount
        """
        try:
            username, balance = s.split()
            balance = decimal.Decimal(float(balance))
        except ValueError:
            return NullAccount()

        if balance <0:
            return NullAccount()
        return cls(username=username, balance=balance)


class NullAccount:
    username =''
    balance = 0

    @classmethod
    def from_string(cls, s):
        raise NotImplementedError
```

In the new version of the code, I defined the new type `NullAccount`, which is used as an error result when `from_string` fails. The biggest change after this modification is reflected in the `caculate_total_balance` section:

```python
def caculate_total_balance(accounts_data):
    """Calculate the total balance of all accounts
    """
    return sum(Account.from_string(s).balance for s in accounts_data)
```

After the adjustment, the caller no longer has to explicitly use the try statement to handle errors, but can assume that the `Account.from_string` function will always return a valid Account object, thus greatly simplifying the entire calculation logic.

> Hint: In the Python world, the "empty object mode" is not uncommon, such as [AnonymousUser](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/2.1/ref/contrib/auth/#anonymoususer) in the famous Django framework -object is a typical null object.

### 6. Use generator functions instead of returning lists

It is particularly common to return lists in functions. Usually, we will first initialize a list `results = []`, then fill it with the `results.append(item)` function in the loop body, and finally return at the end of the function.

For such patterns, we can use generator functions to simplify it. To put it crudely, replace the append statement with yield item. Functions that use generators are usually more concise and more versatile.

```python
def foo_func(items):
    for item in items:
        # ... Use item to return directly after processing item
        yield item
```

I have analyzed this model in detail in [The fourth article in the series "The Doorway of the Container"](https://www.zlovezl.cn/articles/mastering-container-types/). For more details, you can visit the article and search for " Write more scalable code" view.

### 7. Limit the use of recursion

When the function returns its own call, that is, when `recursion` occurs. Recursion is a programming technique that is very useful in certain scenarios, but the bad news is: Python has very limited support for recursion.

This "limited support" is reflected in many ways. First, the Python language does not support ["tail recursive optimization"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tail_call). In addition, Python also has strict limits on the maximum number of recursion levels.

So I suggest: **Try to write less recursion**. If you want to use recursion to solve a problem, first think about whether it can be easily replaced with a loop. If the answer is yes, then rewrite it with a loop. If you must use recursion, please consider the following points:

-Whether the input data size of the function is stable, and whether it must not exceed the maximum layer limit specified by `sys.getrecursionlimit()`
-Is it possible to reduce the number of recursive layers by using cache tool functions like [functools.lru_cache](https://docs.python.org/3/library/functools.html#functools.lru_cache)

## to sum up

In this article, I have virtualized some scenarios related to the return of Python functions, and provided my optimization suggestions for each scenario. Finally, summarize the main points:

- Let the function have a stable return value, a function only does one thing
- Use `functools.partial` to define shortcut functions
- Throwing an exception is also a way to return the result, use it instead of returning an error message
- Whether the function is suitable for returning None, is determined by the "meaning" of the function signature
- Use "Empty Object Mode" to simplify the caller's error handling logic
- Use more generator functions, try to use loops instead of recursion
