# Tips for using decorators

## Foreword


Decorator is a special tool in Python that provides us with a flexible ability to modify functions outside the function. It's a bit like a magic hat with a unique `@` symbol, as long as it is worn on the top of the function head, it can silently change the behavior of the function itself.

You may have dealt with decorators a lot. When doing object-oriented programming, we often use two built-in decorators, @staticmethod and @classmethod. In addition, if you have been in touch with the [click](https://click.palletsprojects.com/en/7.x/) module, you will not be unfamiliar with decorators. click The most well-known parameter definition interface `@click.option(...)` is implemented using decorators.

In addition to using decorators, we often need to write some decorators ourselves. In this article, I will share with you some little knowledge about decorators from two aspects: `best practice` and `common errors`.

## Best Practices

### 1. Try to implement decorators with classes

Most decorators are based on functions and [closures](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Closure_(computer_programming)), but this is not the only way to make decorators. In fact, Python has only one requirement for whether an object can be used in the form of a decorator (`@decorator`): **decorator must be a "callable" object**.

```python
# Use callable to detect whether an object is "callable"
>>> def foo(): pass
...
>>> type(foo)
<class'function'>
>>> callable(foo)
True
```

Functions are naturally "callable" objects. But in addition to functions, we can also make any class "callable". The method is very simple, as long as the custom class's __call__` magic method is enough.

```
class Foo:
    def __call__(self):
        print("Hello, __call___")

foo = Foo()

# OUTPUT: True
print(callable(foo))
# Call foo instance
# OUTPUT: Hello, __call__
foo()
```

Based on this feature, we can easily use classes to implement decorators.

The following code will define a decorator named `@delay(duration)`. The function decorated with it will wait an additional `duration` seconds before each execution. At the same time, we also want to provide users with the `eager_call` interface that does not have to wait for immediate execution.

```python
import time
import functools


class DelayFunc:
    def __init__(self, duration, func):
        self.duration = duration
        self.func = func

    def __call__(self, *args, **kwargs):
        print(f'Wait for {self.duration} seconds...')
        time.sleep(self.duration)
        return self.func(*args, **kwargs)

    def eager_call(self, *args, **kwargs):
        print('Call without delay')
        return self.func(*args, **kwargs)


def delay(duration):
    """Decorator: postpone the execution of a function. Provide the .eager_call method for immediate execution
    """
    # To avoid defining additional functions, use functools.partial directly to help construct
    # DelayFunc example
    return functools.partial(DelayFunc, duration)
```

Sample code for how to use the decorator:

```
@delay(duration=2)
def add(a, b):
    return a + b


# This call will be delayed by 2 seconds
add(1, 2)
# This call will be executed immediately
add.eager_call(1, 2)
```

`@delay(duration)` is a class-based decorator. Of course, if you are very familiar with functions and closures in Python, the above `delay` decorator can actually be implemented using only functions. So why do we use classes to do this?

Compared with pure functions, I think that decorators implemented using classes have several advantages in **specific scenarios**:

- When implementing stateful decorators, operation class attributes are more intuitive and less error-prone than operating closure variables
- When implementing the decorator as a function extension interface, using a class wrapper function is easier to maintain than appending attributes directly to the function object
- It is easier to implement an object that is compatible with both the decorator and the context manager protocol (refer to [unitest.mock.patch](https://docs.python.org/3/library/unittest.mock.html#unittest.mock.patch))

### 2. Write a flatter decorator using the wrapt module

In the process of writing decorators, have you encountered any uncomfortable things? Whether you have it or not, I have anyway. When I was writing code, I was particularly uncomfortable with the following two things:

1. When implementing decorators with parameters, nested function codes are particularly difficult to write and difficult to read
2. Because of the difference between functions and class methods, decorators written for the former cannot often be directly applied to the latter

For example, in the following example, I implemented a decorator that generates random numbers and injects them as function parameters.

```python
import random


def provide_number(min_num, max_num):
    """Decorator: Randomly generate an integer in the range [min_num, max_num], appended as the first positional parameter of the function
    """
    def wrapper(func):
        def decorated(*args, **kwargs):
            num = random.randint(min_num, max_num)
            # Add num as the first parameter and call the function
            return func(num, *args, **kwargs)
        return decorated
    return wrapper



@provide_number(1, 100)
def print_random_number(num):
    print(num)

# Output a random integer from 1-100
# OUTPUT: 72
print_random_number()
```

The `@provide_number` decorator function looks good, but it has the two problems I mentioned earlier: **The nesting level is deep and cannot be used on class methods. **If you use it directly to decorate class methods, the following will occur:

```
class Foo:
    @provide_number(1, 100)
    def print_random_number(self, num):
        print(num)

# OUTPUT: <__main__.Foo object at 0x104047278>
Foo().print_random_number()
```

The `print_random_number` method in the `Foo` class instance will output the class instance `self` instead of the random number `num` we expect.

This result occurs because the class method * (method) * and the function * (function) * have slightly different working mechanisms. If you want to fix this problem, the `provider_number` decorator must smartly skip the `self` variable of the class instance hidden in `*args` when modifying the positional parameters of the class method, in order to correctly use `num` as the first Parameter injection.

At this time, it should be time for the [wrapt](https://pypi.org/project/wrapt/) module to debut. The `wrapt` module is a tool library dedicated to helping you write decorators. Using it, we can easily modify the `provide_number` decorator to perfectly solve the two problems of ""deep nesting level"" and *"cannot be used universally" *

```python
import wrapt

def provide_number(min_num, max_num):
    @wrapt.decorator
    def wrapper(wrapped, instance, args, kwargs):
        # Parameter meaning:
        ##
        #-wrapped: the decorated function or class method
        #-instance:
        #-If the decorator is an ordinary class method, the value is a class instance
        #-If the decorator is classmethod, the value is class
        #-If the decorator is a class/function/static method, the value is None
        ##
        #-args: positional parameters when calling (note that there is no * symbol)
        #-kwargs: keyword parameters when calling (note that there is no ** symbol)
        ##
        num = random.randint(min_num, max_num)
        # No need to pay attention to whether wrapped is a class method or an ordinary function, directly append parameters to the head
        args = (num,) + args
        return wrapped(*args, **kwargs)
    return wrapper

<... Part of the code of the application decorator is omitted...>

# OUTPUT: 48
Foo().print_random_number()
```

Decorators written using the `wrapt` module have the following advantages over the original:

- Fewer nesting levels: Use `@wrapt.decorator` to reduce two levels of nesting to one level
- Simpler: when dealing with position and keyword parameters, you can ignore special cases such as class instances
- More flexibility: After conditional judgment on the value of `instance`, it is easier to make the decorator universal

## Common errors

### 1. "Decorator" is not "Decorator Mode"

["Design Pattern"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Software_design_pattern) is a word well-known in the computer world. If you are a Java programmer and you don’t understand the design patterns at all, then I bet you will be going through a very difficult job interview process.

But when writing Python, we rarely talk about "design patterns." Although Python is also an object-oriented programming language, its [duck type](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Duck_typing) design and excellent dynamic characteristics determine that most of the design patterns come to us It is not a necessity. Therefore, many Python programmers may not have actually applied several design patterns after working for a long time.

However, ["Decorator Pattern"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decorator_pattern) is an exception. Because Python's "decorator" and "decorator pattern" have the same name, I have heard more than once that they are regarded as the same thing, thinking that using "decorator" is to practice the "decorator pattern". But in fact, **they are two completely different things.**

"Decorator pattern" is a programming technique derived entirely from "object-oriented". It has several key components: **a unified interface definition**, **several classes that follow the interface**, and layer-by-layer packaging between classes and classes. In the end, they form a "decoration" effect together.

The "decorator" and "object-oriented" in Python do not have any direct connection, **it can just be a trick between functions and functions.** In fact, the "decorator" does not provide some irreplaceable function, it is just a ["syntactic sugar"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Syntactic_sugar). The following code uses the decorator:

```python
@log_time
@cache_result
def foo(): pass
```

Basically completely equivalent to the following:

```
def foo(): pass

foo = log_time(cache_result(foo))
```

**The biggest contribution of the decorator is that it allows us to write more intuitive and easy-to-read code in certain scenarios**. It is just a "sugar", not a complicated programming model in an object-oriented field.

> Hint: There is a [Example of Implementing Decorator Pattern](https://wiki.python.org/moin/DecoratorPattern) on the Python official website , you can read this example to better understand it.

### 2. Remember to decorate inner functions with functools.wraps()

The following is a simple decorator designed to print the time-consuming function calls:

```python
import time


def timer(wrapped):
    """Decorator: Recording and printing functions takes time"""
    def decorated(*args, **kwargs):
        st = time.time()
        ret = wrapped(*args, **kwargs)
        print('execution take: {} seconds'.format(time.time()-st))
        return ret
    return decorated


@timer
def random_sleep():
    """Random sleep for a little while""""
    time.sleep(random.random())
```

Although there is no error in the `timer` decorator, after using it to decorate a function, the original signature of the function will be destroyed. In other words, you can no longer get the name and document content of the `random_sleep` function correctly, all signatures will become the value of the inner function `decorated`:

```python
print(random_sleep.__name__)
# Output'decorated'
print(random_sleep.__doc__)
# Output None
```

Although this is only a minor problem, it can sometimes lead to undetectable bugs. Fortunately, the standard library functools provides a solution for it. You only need to decorate the inner decorated function with another decorator when you define the decorator.

It sounds a bit ridiculous, but it is actually just a new line of code:

```python
def timer(wrapped):
    # Assign the real signature of the wrapper function to decorated
    @functools.wraps(wrapped)
    def decorated(*args, **kwargs):
        # <...> omitted
    return decorated
```

After this processing, the `timer` decorator will not affect the function it decorates.

```python
print(random_sleep.__name__)
# Output'random_sleep'
print(random_sleep.__doc__)
# Output'random sleep for a little while'
```

### 3. Remember to use nonlocal when modifying outer variables

Decorators are an advanced application of function objects. In the process of writing decorators, you will often encounter situations where inner functions need to modify outer function variables. Just like this decorator:

```python
import functools

def counter(func):
    """Decorator: record and print the number of calls """
    count = 0
    @functools.wraps(func)
    def decorated(*args, **kwargs):
        # Accumulation of times
        count += 1
        print(f"Count: {count}")
        return func(*args, **kwargs)
    return decorated

@counter
def foo():
    pass

foo()
```

In order to count the number of function calls, we need to modify the value of the `count` variable defined by the outer function inside the `decorated` function. However, the above code is problematic, and the interpreter will report an error when executing it:

```raw
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "counter.py", line 22, in <module>
    foo()
  File "counter.py", line 11, in decorated
    count += 1
UnboundLocalError: local variable'count' referenced before assignment
```

This error is caused by the scope of nesting of the counter and decorated functions.

When the interpreter executes `count += 1`, it does not know that `count` is a variable defined in the outer scope. It treats `count` as a local variable and searches in the current scope. In the end, no definition of the `count` variable was found, and an error was thrown.

In order to solve this problem, we need to tell the interpreter through the `nonlocal` keyword: **"count variable does not belong to the current local scope, go outside and find it"**, the previous error can be solved.

```python
def decorated(*args, **kwargs):
    nonlocal count
    count += 1
    # <... omitted...>
```

> Hint: If you want to learn more about the history of nonlocal keywords, you can refer to [PEP-3104](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-3104/)

## to sum up

In this article, I shared with you some tips and small knowledge about decorators.

Summary of some points:

- All callable objects can be used to implement decorators
- Mix functions and classes to better implement decorators
- The wrapt module is very useful, it can help us write complex decorators with simpler code
- "Decorator" is just syntactic sugar, it is not "Decorator mode"
- The decorator will change the original signature of the function, you need `functools.wraps`
- When modifying variables of outer functions in inner functions, you need to use the `nonlocal` keyword
