# Exception handling

If you program in Python, you cannot avoid exceptions, because exceptions are everywhere in the language. For example, when you press `ctrl+c` to exit during script execution, the interpreter will generate a `KeyboardInterrupt` exception. And `KeyError`, `ValueError`, `TypeError`, etc. are old friends everywhere in daily programming.

Exception handling consists of two parts: "capture" and "throw". "Capture" refers to the use of `try...except` to wrap a specific sentence to properly complete the error process. The proper use of `raise` to actively "throw" exceptions is an essential part of elegant code.

In this article, I will share 3 good habits related to exception handling.

## Three good habits

### 1. Only do the most accurate exception catching

If you don't understand the abnormal mechanism enough, you will inevitably feel a natural fear of it. You may think: *Exception is a bad thing. A good program should catch all exceptions and let everything run smoothly.* The code written with this idea usually contains a large amount of ambiguous exception catching logic.

Let's use an executable script as an example:

```python
# -*- coding: utf-8 -*-
import requests
import re


def save_website_title(url, filename):
    """Get the page title of an address, and then write it to a file

    :returns: True if saved successfully, otherwise print error, return False
    """
    try:
        resp = requests.get(url)
        obj = re.search(r'<title>(.*)</title>', resp.text)
        if not obj:
            print('save failed: title tag not found in page content')
            return False

        title = obj.grop(1)
        with open(filename,'w') as fp:
            fp.write(title)
            return True
    except Exception:
        print(f'save failed: unable to save title of {url} to {filename}')
        return False


def main():
    save_website_title('https://www.qq.com','qq_title.txt')


if __name__ =='__main__':
    main()
```

The `save_website_title` function in the script does several things. It first obtains the content of the webpage through the Internet, then matches the title using regular rules, and finally writes the title in a local file. There are two steps that are easy to make mistakes here: **network request** and **local file operation**. So in the code, we use a big `try... except` statement block to wrap up these steps. **Safety first**.

So, what's the problem with this concise and easy-to-understand code?

If you happen to have a computer with Python installed next to it, then you can try to run the above script again. You will find that the above code cannot be executed successfully. And you will also find that no matter how you modify the value of the URL and the target file, the program will still report an error *"save failed: unable to..."*. why?

The problem lies in this huge try...except block. If you put your eyes close to the screen, check this code very carefully. You will find that when writing a function, I made a **small mistake**. I mistyped the method of obtaining the regular matching string into `obj.grop(1)`, which is missing a `u' (`obj. group(1)`).

But because of the overly large and ambiguous exception catch, this `AttibuteError` that should have been thrown due to the wrong method name was swallowed. This adds unnecessary trouble to our debugging process.

The purpose of exception catching is not to catch as many exceptions as possible. If we insist from the beginning: **Only do the most accurate exception catch**. Then such a problem will not happen at all, and accurate capture includes:

- Always capture only those statement blocks that may throw exceptions
- Try to only capture the exact exception type, not the ambiguous `Exception`

According to this principle, our example should be changed to this:

```python
from requests.exceptions import RequestException


def save_website_title(url, filename):
    try:
        resp = requests.get(url)
    except RequestException as e:
        print(f'save failed: unable to get page content: {e}')
        return False

    # This regular operation itself should not throw an exception, so we do not need to use the try block
    # It doesn't matter if the group is mistakenly made into grop, the program will immediately pass AttributeError
    # tell us.
    obj = re.search(r'<title>(.*)</title>', resp.text)
    if not obj:
        print('save failed: title tag not found in page content')
        return False
    title = obj.group(1)

    try:
        with open(filename,'w') as fp:
            fp.write(title)
    except IOError as e:
        print(f'save failed: unable to write to file {filename}: {e}')
        return False
    else:
        return True
```

### 2. Don't let exceptions destroy abstract consistency

About four or five years ago, I was working on a back-end API project for a mobile application. If you also have experience in developing back-end APIs, then you must know that such systems need to develop a set of ""API error code specifications"" to provide convenience for clients to handle call errors.

An error code returned probably looks like this:

```javascript
// HTTP Status Code: 400
// Content-Type: application/json
{
    "code": "UNABLE_TO_UPVOTE_YOUR_OWN_REPLY",
    "detail": "You cannot recommend your reply"
}
```

After formulating the error code specification, the next task is how to implement it. The project at that time used the Django framework, and Django's error page was implemented using an exception mechanism. For example, if you want a request to return a 404 status code, then just execute `raise Http404` during the request processing.

Therefore, we naturally get inspiration from Django. First, we defined the error code exception class in the project: `APIErrorCode`. Then according to the "error code specification", write a lot of error codes that inherit this class. When you need to return an error message to the user, you only need to do a `raise` to get it.

```python
raise error_codes.UNABLE_TO_UPVOTE
raise error_codes.USER_HAS_BEEN_BANNED
...
```

Unsurprisingly, everyone likes to return error codes in this way. Because it is very convenient to use, no matter how deep the call stack is, as long as you want to return an error code to the user, just call `raise error_codes.ANY_THING`.

Over time, the project has become larger and larger, and there are more and more places where APIErrorCode is thrown. One day, when I was about to reuse a low-level image processing function, I suddenly encountered a problem.

I saw a piece of code that made me very tangled:

```python
# Inside a module that processes images
# <PROJECT_ROOT>/util/image/processor.py
def process_image(...):
    try:
        image = Image.open(fp)
    except Exception:
        # Description (non-project original comment): The exception will be caught by Django's middleware and returned to the front end
        # "The format of the uploaded image is incorrect" message
        raise error_codes.INVALID_IMAGE_UPLOADED
    ...
```

The `process_image` function will try to parse a file object. If the object cannot be opened normally as an image, it will throw an `error_codes.INVALID_IMAGE_UPLOADED (APIErrorCode subclass)` exception, thereby returning the error code JSON to the caller.

Let me give you this code from scratch. When I originally wrote `process_image`, although I put it in the `util.image` module, the only place where I called this function at the time was "Process POST request for user to upload images". In order to be lazy, I let the function directly throw an APIErrorCode exception to complete the error handling work.

Let me talk about the problem at that time. At that time I needed to write a batch image script that was running in the background, and it just happened to reuse the functions implemented by the `process_image` function. But something wrong happened at this time, if I want to reuse the function, then:

- I have to catch an exception named `INVALID_IMAGE_UPLOADED`
    - **Even if my pictures are not from user uploads at all**
- I must introduce the `APIErrorCode` exception class as a dependency to catch exceptions
    - **Even if my script has nothing to do with Django API**

**This is the result of the inconsistency of the abstract level of the exception class.**The meaning of the APIErrorCode exception class is to express an "error code" that can be directly recognized and consumed by the end user (person). **It belongs to the highest level of abstraction in the entire project.** But for convenience, we introduced and threw it in the underlying module. This breaks the abstract consistency of the `image.processor` module and affects its reusability and maintainability.

This kind of situation belongs to "the module throws an exception that is higher than the abstract level to which it belongs". To avoid such errors, you need to pay attention to the following points:

- Let the module only throw exceptions that are consistent with the current abstraction level
    - For example, the `image.processer` module should throw its own `ImageOpenError` exception
- Abnormal packaging and conversion where necessary
    - For example, the image processing module's `ImageOpenError` low-level exception wrapper should be converted to `APIErrorCode` high-level exception, close to the high-level abstraction (view function)

Modified code:

```python
# <PROJECT_ROOT>/util/image/processor.py
class ImageOpenError(Exception):
    pass


def process_image(...):
    try:
        image = Image.open(fp)
    except Exception as e:
        raise ImageOpenError(exc=e)
    ...

# <PROJECT_ROOT>/app/views.py
def foo_view_function(request):
    try:
        process_image(fp)
    except ImageOpenError:
        raise error_codes.INVALID_IMAGE_UPLOADED
```

In addition to avoiding exceptions that are higher than the current abstraction level, we should also avoid leaking exceptions that are lower than the current abstraction level.

If you have used the `requests` module, you may have discovered that the exception it throws when it requests a page error is not the original exception of the `urllib3` module it uses at the bottom, but it is wrapped by `requests.exceptions` Once abnormal.

```python
>>> try:
... requests.get('https://www.invalid-host-foo.com')
... except Exception as e:
... print(type(e))
...
<class'requests.exceptions.ConnectionError'>
```

This is also to ensure the abstract consistency of the exception class. Because the urllib3 module is the underlying implementation detail that the requests module depends on, and this detail may change in future versions. Therefore, the exceptions thrown by it must be properly packaged to avoid the impact of future low-level changes on the request processing error of the client.

### 3. Exception handling should not overwhelm

Earlier we mentioned that exception catching must be precise and the level of abstraction must be consistent. But in the real world, if you strictly follow these processes, then you are likely to encounter another problem: **exception handling logic is too much, so that the code core logic is disrupted**. The specific performance is that the code is full of `try`, `except`, and `raise` statements, making the core logic difficult to recognize.

Let us look at an example:

```python
def upload_avatar(request):
    """User uploaded new avatar"""
    try:
        avatar_file = request.FILES['avatar']
    except KeyError:
        raise error_codes.AVATAR_FILE_NOT_PROVIDED

    try:
       resized_avatar_file = resize_avatar(avatar_file)
    except FileTooLargeError as e:
        raise error_codes.AVATAR_FILE_TOO_LARGE
    except ResizeAvatarError as e:
        raise error_codes.AVATAR_FILE_INVALID

    try:
        request.user.avatar = resized_avatar_file
        request.user.save()
    except Exception:
        raise error_codes.INTERNAL_SERVER_ERROR
    return HttpResponse({})
```

This is a view function that processes the user's uploaded avatar. There are three things done in this function, and exception catches are done for each thing. If an exception occurs while doing something, a user-friendly error is returned to the front end.

Although such a processing flow is reasonable, it is clear that the exception handling logic in the code is a bit "overwhelming." At first glance, the entire code is indented, it is difficult to extract the core logic of the code.

As early as the 2.5 version, the Python language has provided a tool to deal with such scenarios: "context manager (context manager)". The context manager is a special Python object used with the `with` statement, through which you can make exception handling more convenient.

So, how to use the context manager to improve our exception handling process? Let's look directly at the code.

```python
class raise_api_error:
    """captures specified exception and raise ApiErrorCode instead

    :raises: AttributeError if code_name is not valid
    """
    def __init__(self, captures, code_name):
        self.captures = captures
        self.code = getattr(error_codes, code_name)

    def __enter__(self):
        # This method will be called when entering the context
        return self

    def __exit__(self, exc_type, exc_val, exc_tb):
        # This method will be called when exiting the context
        # exc_type, exc_val, exc_tb represent the thrown in this context respectively
        # Exception type, abnormal value, error stack
        if exc_type is None:
            return False

        if exc_type == self.captures:
            raise self.code from exc_val
        return False
```

In the above code, we define a context manager named `raise_api_error`, which does nothing when entering the context. But when exiting the context, it will determine whether an exception of type `self.captures` is thrown in the current context, and if so, replace it with the exception class of `APIErrorCode`.

After using this context manager, the whole function can become more clear and concise:

```python
def upload_avatar(request):
    """User uploaded new avatar"""
    with raise_api_error(KeyError,'AVATAR_FILE_NOT_PROVIDED'):
        avatar_file = request.FILES['avatar']

    with raise_api_error(ResizeAvatarError,'AVATAR_FILE_INVALID'),\
            raise_api_error(FileTooLargeError,'AVATAR_FILE_TOO_LARGE'):
        resized_avatar_file = resize_avatar(avatar_file)

    with raise_api_error(Exception,'INTERNAL_SERVER_ERROR'):
        request.user.avatar = resized_avatar_file
        request.user.save()
    return HttpResponse({})
```

> Hint: I suggest reading [PEP 343 - The "with" Statement | Python.org](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0343/) to learn more about the context manager Knowledge.
>
> The module [contextlib](https://docs.python.org/3/library/contextlib.html) also provides a lot of tool functions and examples related to writing context managers.

## To sum up

In this article, I shared three suggestions related to exception handling. Finally, summarize the main points:

- Only capture statements that may throw exceptions, avoid ambiguous capture logic
- Maintain the abstract consistency of module exception classes, and wrap the underlying exception classes if necessary
- Use "Context Manager" to simplify repeated exception handling logic
